The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Pilgrims' First Christmas, by
Josephine Pittman Scribner

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The Pilgrims' First Christmas

Author: Josephine Pittman Scribner

Release Date: November 26, 2021 [eBook #66828]

Language: English

Produced by: Charlene Taylor, David E. Brown, and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
             produced from images generously made available by The
             Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PILGRIMS' FIRST
CHRISTMAS ***





THE PILGRIMS’ FIRST CHRISTMAS

[Illustration]


[Illustration]




  THE PILGRIMS’ FIRST
  CHRISTMAS

  BY

  JOSEPHINE PITTMAN SCRIBNER

  [Illustration]

  THE PILGRIM PRESS
  BOSTON  NEW YORK  CHICAGO




  COPYRIGHT, 1913
  BY LUTHER H. CARY

  THE·PLIMPTON·PRESS
  NORWOOD·MASS·U·S·A




THE PILGRIMS’ FIRST CHRISTMAS




THE PILGRIMS’ FIRST CHRISTMAS

[Illustration]


It was a bleak December day in the year 1620. All day long, the
Mayflower struggled along the coast amidst the rain and snow, her
rudder broken, her masts split in three pieces, and heavy seas dashing
over her bow. The men had been called to man the oars and all were
filled with anxiety and grief and apprehension of unknown perils to be
faced. It was as if the Almighty would try them, as he tried Abraham.
What could now sustain them but the spirit of God and his grace? If
they looked behind them there was the mighty ocean, which they had
passed and which was now as a main bar and gulf to separate them from
all the civil parts of the world. If they looked forward, what could
feed their hopes; what could they see but the weather-beaten face of
the wilderness, the summer gone and the whole country full of wild
beasts and wild men? And what multitudes there might be of them, they
knew not. Locked in the airless cabins, with the hatches battened down,
were the women and children. Twenty little children to amuse and keep
quiet, while mother hearts were heavy with fear and terror. Moving
among them was an English maid, divinely fair in her beauty. No need
for her to paint her cheeks of damask and rose. In her strength and
beauty she was as an angel of light to the homesick Pilgrim women.
The day had been long and dreary to Mary Chilton. All night she had
dreamed and all day she had thought of dear and mighty England; of
the lanes and the fields and the songs of the birds, the faces of the
neighbors going about, and the church at the end of the village street
with the ivy on the tower. The tears started to her eyes. She turned
away to hide them; but they did not escape the notice of John Winslow,
who was bending over the oars. His brave Mary! He set his face firmly.
Surely she must not falter now; she, who, in her own splendid health
had nursed the sick, amused the children, restless at the prolonged
confinement, kept the Billington boy from serious mischief, a task at
which strong men quailed, and instilled courage and hope in the hearts
of the weak. Even as he watched her, her tears vanished and her smile
beamed down on the Billington boy, who spoke to her.

“Tell me, Mistress Mary, what am I going to find in my shoe on Santa
Claus morning?”

She shook her head gaily--“Ah, that is a secret we must wait to find
out upon the blessed Christmas morning.”

“It will not be hay, will it?”

“No,--only naughty boys get hay in their shoes, on St. Nicholas day,
and you’ve promised me, Francis, you know, to keep out of mischief.”

“But will there be something?” he insisted.

“I cannot promise, Francis; we must hope and wait.”

Between the beat of the oars, John Winslow called out softly, “Mary!”

She moved nearer him. “What ails you? Are you sad?”

“My heart is sore, John. I know it is wrong. I love my people and my
religion is dear to me, but I wish I were back in England! Just think,
John, it is the blessed Christmas week. They are making merry, all
over England, in holly-decked halls, with great fires roaring up the
chimneys. Feasts are being prepared and families are drawing together
in love and communion. And look at our position; tossed on a strange
coast, with no harbor to enter, no friends to welcome us, no inns to
entertain us and refresh our weather-beaten bodies, no place to seek
for succor.”

“Anon,” said John, “but Robert Coppin, our pilot, bids us be of good
cheer, that there is sure to be a creek or river to enter and escape
this angry sea. And, Mary, I pray you do not plague your heart about
that young scapegrace Billington. I cannot comprehend how such a
profane wretch as his father came to be shuffled in with the company of
Pilgrims. He was not of the Leyden church, ’tis sure. And that boy, it
is providential that the whole ship was not blown up when he fired that
fowling-piece almost within four feet of the gunpowder barrel.”

Mary shook her head. “He did not know the danger. He has been cooped up
and it is hard to keep so many little boys out of mischief. With such a
father, I grieve for him; and for all these little children on board,
that any joy should be cut out of their lives.”

“I pray you, Mary, go to your rest, and I promise you, on my honor,
that the morning light will bring comfort and joy. Already the sea
is abating and Robert Coppin, our pilot, says all will be well. Your
example has been a star of hope. Do not yield to despondency now.”

“I will not, John. It was the storm and thinking of Christmas at home.
And you, John, promise me that when you go ashore I may go too. I am
like the young man in the Bible; I want to go out to see what I can
see. Goodnight until to-morrow and may the Lord keep you.”

       *       *       *       *       *

When the morning broke bright and clear, the Mayflower lay inside a
good harbor wherein a hundred sail of ships might anchor.

To the weary Pilgrims the first view of their new home was delightful.
All around were the “trees of the Lord,” the mighty cedars, down to the
very edge of the waters. There were oaks, pines, junipers, sassafras,
and other sweet woods they knew not; so the first odors that greeted
them were not from burning hearth fires but the balsamic odors of the
forest.

When the shallop was made ready, sixteen armed men, some of the women
with the linen and clothing to wash on shore, Mary Chilton and John
Winslow, entered it and, it being flood-tide, made a safe landing on
the shallow beach.

Mary Chilton stepped from the little shallop on to a large boulder,
and the history of women in America, and the fame of Plymouth Rock,
began with her.

“The others are so busy with their linens,” she whispered to John,
“they have not noticed that I am the first woman to step foot on the
new land.”

“And you are the first woman to step into the kingdom of my heart,”
said John, softly. And thus, under the fragrant boughs of the pines,
their troth was plighted.

The other women exclaimed over the fresh pure water which they found
and the excellent clay which washed like soap. It had not been possible
to wash on board ship and it can be imagined they had plenty to do on
this first American “Washday Monday.”

Mary and John walked down the dim aisles of the forest. They found many
pure little brooks and drank the fresh water with delight. They built a
fire to signal to the Mayflower that all was right. Mary ran from one
tree to another, recognizing them as old friends. “Look, John, it is
holly, like our own and yet not like it; and cedar and, oh, John, here
is the ground-pine, our own ground-pine, trailing its garlands over the
ground! And walnut trees, full of nuts, and great store of strawberry
and grape vines.” Mary’s face glowed with a sudden thought. “John, we
will celebrate Christmas, here in this new land! It is true we have no
stately halls to deck with greenery, no great chimneys for the roaring
fires, no old bells to ring out the glad tidings on the Holy morning,
but we can trim the cabin of the Mayflower with holly and cedar. Look,
here is wood. We can have a sparkling fire on the hearth-box. We will
have carols, for you know that we Pilgrims _can_ sing, John. And we can
have the communion of friends, and we can show our love like Christians
indeed, one to another.”

But John shook his head gravely. “No, Mary, there will be those who
will protest and mutter against the observance of the pagan festival.
It savors of Rome, and you know well that we have set our faces against
anything that is used in Popery. These are the things from which we
have fled.”

“Do not be so strait-laced, John. Are we not required to keep in pious
memory such holy days as the Birth, Death, and Resurrection? It is meet
that we should commemorate our landing upon these shores. Do you know,
John, that I am deeply moved by the thought that all these first days
here are holy days. Although the glory and the sunlight is hidden from
us by distress, privation, and sickness, yet I prophesy that long,
long years from now, when our graves are leveled and all has vanished,
men will stand with bared heads upon this sacred spot. What we do now
will all be noted. Let it not be said that we forgot the examples of
oppression and intolerance which have always been before us: forgot the
bitter lessons we have learned and failed to be kind and charitable and
yielding in little and indifferent things.”

“Those are old thoughts for such a young head, Mary, and in some way
you twist the words to suit yourself, but go to our dear and loving
friend, Elder Brewster, and see if he deems it fitting.”

“He is so affectionate and tender-hearted,” said Mary, “that I am
sure he will wish to take part in our joys as he has partaken of our
distresses.”

“I know what I would do if I were he,” said John, smiling down at her
happy face, “I would let you do it.”

But John must not shirk the burden of the work, which was to procure
firewood and water for use on the ship, and when the little shallop
returned to the Mayflower it was laden with casks of fresh water,
boughs of cedar and juniper wood, garlands of ground-pine, walnuts, a
great store, branches of the red holly berries, and the waxen sprays
of the bayberries. And Mary Chilton kept her plan in her heart. Upon
the counsel of Elder Brewster she went straightway to Master Jones, the
Captain of the ship, and unfolded it to him.

The Captain was a rough sea-dog, but capable of goodly feeling and
kindly impulses. He was fair-minded and friendly and listened to her
with respectful attention, and when she had done, promised to lend his
aid to make their first Christmas in the new land as nearly like an
English holiday as their means and circumstances would permit.

On the 25th of December the little company assembled at night, in
the cabin of the Mayflower. Garlands of ground-pine decked the walls
and holly boughs graced the posts. The cedar wood burning on the sand
hearth smelled very sweet and strong.

They kneeled and gave thanks to God for the completion of their
perilous journey.

Then Elder Brewster said: “Friends, we are far from home, with unknown
dangers facing us, but let us forget, this night, all that may be in
store for us and remember that the whole civil world is celebrating the
birth of Christ. Let it be understood that in no way are we departing
from the principles for which we suffered in England, fled to Holland,
crossed the ocean, and landed here in this distant, savage, and even
dangerous land. God has not revealed His whole will to us, but He has
made to burn within us a desire for English laws, English manners, and
an English home and education for our children. It is no priestly rite
which we are celebrating here, it is the manifestation of the ‘Pilgrim
spirit,’ this gathering together, in one, as the children of God, into
Christ’s own liberty. It is the season of peace and good-will, when
disaffections are forgotten and friendships are cemented more closely,
and all people, as the wise men of old, come bearing gifts. The first
Christmas gift, which is ours from this new land, is this,” and he
held aloft in his hand a goblet of sparkling water, fresh and clear
and pure. “This comes from a sweet brook that runs under a hillside
and many delicate springs, and is as good water as can be drunk.” He
pointed silently to the water-casks.

The famished thirsty ones, who for an hundred days had not tasted any
but stored water, crowded around the casks and drank their first New
England water with as much delight as ever they drank drink in their
lives.

Then Elder Brewster pointed to a large basket of corn or maize, some
red, some yellow, and some marked with blue, a goodly sight. “This, my
friends, is a gift of Providence, without which I do not know what we
would do. We will not eat it but will guard it as precious seed with
which to make the plantation.”

They could not admire it enough, never having seen anything like it
except in the museum at Leyden. Scant as their food had been and still
bid fair to be for a space, they all agreed that this seed was a gift
of God and must be guarded as such.

Elder Brewster went on: “To-day no man has rested. Some have felled
timber, some have sawed, some rived and some carried, but all have
worked without ceasing to lay the foundations of our first homes in
this wilderness. We receive them reverently, these free homes, and
promise to guard their hallowed walls within which our children may
first learn to love their country and their God.

“And the great gift, my friends, the gift that is more than wealth,
is the freedom to worship God after our own wills, to plant the first
colony for the glory of God and the advancement of the Christian
faith. God not only sifted three kingdoms to get the seed for this
enterprise, but sifted that seed over again. Every person whom He would
not have go at this time to plant the first colony of England, He sent
back, even from mid-ocean, in the Speedwell.

“It is given us to establish the principles of self-government and
freedom of worship and to deepen and expand the faith. And now,
friends, thanks to our hunters, we have a feast prepared of roast goose
and fowls, which will make a pleasant change from the dried neat’s
tongue and Holland cheese and biscuits of the ship’s diet. We had like
to have some deer,”--and here he smiled knowingly. “The men saw some
and shot at them but missed them. Thomas Bradford said that one buck
over the shoulder was worth three in the bush.”

There was a shout of laughter at the discomfited hunters and then they
bowed their heads to say grace and then fell to with many expressions
of good-will. It was sweet and comfortable to see such lively and true
expressions of dear and unfeigned love.

While they were feasting, Mary Chilton slipped away. Down in a lowly
bed lay a mother and a young babe, even as that other mother of old;
low and mean and poor the surroundings, but holding the hope, almost
divine, of a people.

Mary bent over the brooding mother and in her face was an adoration not
of earth but of heaven.

“Susanna, are you asleep?” she said softly.

“No,” said the mother; “I but lie here, wondering what this new land
has to give my babe. I am heart-sick with fear.”

Mary put a sprig of bayberries in her slender hand and replied,
“Rather, Susanna, ask what your babe will give to the new land. He will
give his strength and his faith and his youth. Give him to me a moment.”

And she bore him up to the company.

“Friends,” she said, “I bring to you another Christmas gift. I bring
to you a new citizen, born in the land of the free with no heritage of
oppression and cruelty.”

“A citizen! A citizen! It is an omen!” they cried, and little
Peregrine White was handed around and admired while the Pilgrims sang,
with lusty voices, the good old English carol, “Unto us a child is
born.”

Susanna White, lying there in her lowly bed, heard and marveled and was
content.




And so the gifts were passed, that first Christmas in 1620. They
reveled in things of the soul rather than the body. They counted their
tale of gifts and they were good. The clear, sparkling water; the seed
corn, precious as jewels; the beginning of the free, fair homes; the
new citizen, the little pilgrim; and the great gift of self-government
and the freedom to worship according to the dictates of their
consciences and to deepen and expand the living faith.

But the greatest gift of all is the mighty nation that has sprung from
their loins. They have multiplied as the stars of the heavens and as
the sand which is on the seashore.

As the children of peace, they have received peace, and the divine
blessing rests upon them.




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:


  Italicized text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.

  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Inconsistencies in hyphenation have been standardized.

  Archaic or alternate spelling has been retained from the original.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PILGRIMS' FIRST
CHRISTMAS ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
